Pioner

Year	≤1992
RAM	48 kB
ROM	2-10 kB
CPU	i8080 2 MHz
Graph	384x256x5, 384x256x8
Group	Specialist

Pioner is a regular "Specialist" computer with 5 color graphics. It hasn't a
parallel port. And it has an incompatible keyboard.

In the factory configuration, computer has only one ROM chip of 2 kilobyte. ROM
chip contain "Monitor, version 1". In this configuration, the computer cannot
run most programs. The PCB has places for 4 additional ROM chips. I added 2 more
ROM chips and flashed "Monitor, version 2 ". For some reason, the CS signal was
not connected to the additional ROMs, so I added two wires. Aftar the computer
can run all programs.

In the factory configuration, the keyboard (matrix of keys, key codes) does not
match the original computer "Specialist". The keyboard normally work only in
programs uses keyboard by standard ROM functions. In most game programs, the
functions of the arrow keys performed by other (inconveniently located) keys.
The buttons are very hard. Perhaps over time, the rubber has changed its
properties. Now the rubber is as hard as car tires. Buttons swing under the
finger in all directions like an analog stick. The keyboard uses a thin
textolite instead of a film membrane.

Otherwise, this is the coolest and most beautiful Specialist that I have seen.

I added one K565RU5 RAM chip (6264 compatible) over installed chips. This made
it possible to increase the number of colors to 8. I added 2 more wires for
RAM pins.

I added a parallel port. I soldered new K580VV55 chip (i8255 compatible) over
factory installed K580VV55 chip. The developers did not provide place on the
PCB for the second K580BB55 chip, which is a shame. Another wire with a CS
signal was pulled along the board to this chip. And from the chip there is
a whole loop of wires to the controller of the SD card. This upgrade does not
look so beautiful, but it's worth it. Now this is a computer "Specialist" in the
maximum configuration, which is convenient not only for games, but also for
development.

More information can be found in the Specialist folder.

