Argo FV-6511

Year:	≤1992
RAM:	128 kB
ROM:	2 kB
CPU:	Z80 3.5 MHz
Text:	80x25x16
Graph:	640x200x8, 320x200x16, 256x192x15
Group:	ZX Spectrum

This is a very strange computer. It works with the tape as with a floppy disk.
The tape has a CP/M file system, sectors, a list of files in the first sectors,
and the files can be fragmented. The computer is able to detect sectors with
damaged tape and dont use them. Argo uses the Z80 processor and this computer
can run programs for the "ZX Spectrum 48" computer. Argo has 128 kilobytes of
RAM, but it can't run programs for the ZX Spectrum 128. Argo's video adapter
is built on the i8275 chip, on the same chip that built the Radio 86RK computer.
Agro has a hardware text video mode 80x25x16 with variable character generator.
Argo has 640x200x8, 320x200x16 graphics video modes. And it's all about the same
computer.

The ROM size of this computer is only 2 kilobytes. The ROM contains only the
bootloader from the tape. Every time the power is turned on, the TCP/M operating
system boots from the tape. TCP/M is CP/M with a tape recorder driver instead
of a floppy drive. T is Tape.

For this computer, a special tape recorder is needed, in which rewind, playback
and recording can be activated by an electrical signal. The authors of the
computer advise the Mayak-231 tape recorder and its later modifications. I
bought an Orel-101-1 tape recorder for this computer.

The first time you use a cassette, you must format it. During the formatting of
the cassette, the computer writes marks on the cassette containing sector
numbers. When working with a tape, the operating system uses these marks to
determine where and which sector begins. In what direction should the cassette
be rewound in order to find the desired sector.

Tape recorder control is not unique to this computer. You can connect the tape
recorder to any computer with a parallel port. Of interest here is the tape
recorder driver for the TCP/M operating system. It controls the tape recorder.

The computer's ROM does not contain the computer firmware "ZX Spectrum 48",
which is needed by ZX programs. The ROM does not have a program for switching
the computer to the compatibility mode with the computer "ZX Spectrum 48". This
program and firmware must be loaded from the cassette every time before starting
any ZX Spectrum game.

How did the authors manage to make the video adapter based on the i8275 chip
compatible with the ZX Spectrum? They placed the character generator in RAM. The
character generator format is the same as the ZX Spectrum screen format and it
is located at the same address as the screen. If the video memory is filled with
certain character codes, then the character generator becomes the ZX Spectrum
screen.

The keyboard is locked while the ZX program is loading and remains locked when
finished. To unlock the keyboard, you must press F10. The F9 key resets the
computer without exiting the ZX Spectrum mode. The F8 key returns the computer
to TCP/M. This suggests that the ZX keyboard is being emulated.

The computer has an excellent keyboard, high-quality printed circuit board and
a good metal case that does not give the impression of a brick. Personally, I
fell in love with metal cases after such computers.
